# Meeting Transcription

  Meeting started: 7/9/2026, 2:04:52 PM
  Duration: 57 minutes
  Participants: ABHA MARATHE, AISHWARYA KHOPE, ANIKET DAKORE, APURVA BHAMARE, ATHARVA BHAGWAT, MANAS TAMBEKAR, SUDARSHAN CHAUDHARI, TANVI KOKANE, VED KULKARNI

  [View original transcript](https://app.tactiq.io/api/2/u/m/r/gmTs4viE2TYKxfWH796w?o=txt)

    

  

  
    ## Highlights

    > 02:43 ABHA MARATHE: Yes, I am presenting. Also my white.
> 05:47 ABHA MARATHE: Yeah. So, you are using the trial and Accepted Impurity. Okay, so this is life. That means you have added the trivalent impurity to create the free type. This is pretty type. P type semiconductor. So I have used the drive and impurity but how I have doped it I have doubted lightly Now, if you remember, I told you to understand the meaning of this doping which is very important is in our subject, okay? Lightly talked medium, doped and
> 33:58 ABHA MARATHE: Right, I want you to understand see this is not in your syllabus, but I want you to understand one very important point which will because I am I want you to be
> 34:10 ABHA MARATHE: prepared with your some interview point of view as well. So Photo Resist Material. Okay. So, what actually is photo resist and what is the meaning of refer? That these two things I want you to understand what is photoresist. It is used only to grow the different patterns on the, on the On your transistor. Right? So that it will it will be used as a, you know, as a optical mask can be
> 37:42 ABHA MARATHE: Why? Because current flows only then there is a potential difference. This channel is formed. But this terminal is also zero. This terminal is also 0, both are at same potential. Current will find Right. No, current will flow. But then, I apply. A positive voltage here. VD. And what should happen? Yes. What should happen when a voltage? I have applied here. Current Windflower will not flow. It will flow.
> 38:42 ABHA MARATHE: Current wind flow, okay? but, The channel. Now, you understand this very important part?
> 50:20 ABHA MARATHE: and actually, if I tell you more minutely, There is a reduced slope asana. It is not like that. It is, reduced slope. So your slope is reduced here. Actually speaking and that reduce slope is because the voltage at the grain at

  ## Transcript

  00:00 ABHA MARATHE: You take it. Let's just start with the small. Topic. Let me, first of all, start with the two terminal MOSFET. To terminal structure. Yesterday. See yesterday, where we stopped yesterday. If you remember, we have just discussed the introductory session, the introduction. That Why we need the third control? Right? Why we need gate as a control. Why we are not able to use diode itself for performing the all these activities, like what we discussed yesterday. And that we have seen that how the field. How the field is controlling the current and then we stop that.
01:06 ABHA MARATHE: What is a need of field effect transistor, right? So why I want the field effect transistor Which diode cannot be. You cannot use okay, why you cannot use and why we require the field effect transistor transistor everything and then we we started on the the discussion of MOSFET. Type of Mosquet. now type of before, going for type of MOSFET also
01:38 SUDARSHAN CHAUDHARI: Hi everyone, this is an automated message to let you know my Tactiq extension: https://tactiq.io/r/transcribing is transcribing this meeting for me so I can give my full attention to you.
01:38 ABHA MARATHE: We will just discuss about the two terminal structure. Because you are aware of MOSFET. Hospet stands for metal. Side. Semiconductor field effect transistor. Hospet oxide. Semiconductor field effect transistor. so before going to the actual transistor, just about this computer minister structure which is also called as moscap Right. So Wherever you go for this two terminal structure, that means I'm having on the two terminals. So first of all, let us start with the substrate. This is the substrate. E.
02:42 VED KULKARNI: Presenting.
02:43 ABHA MARATHE: Yes, I am presenting. Also my white.
03:03 ABHA MARATHE: Yeah. So I was discussing about this MOSFET Two terminal. Structure or mosque, MOSFET metal oxide, semiconductor field effect transistor. So how how you go with this? Let us. First of all, understand only two terminal. And try to understand this which is also called as moscap. This is called So, b substrate. So what you have on this? On the piece of straight, you have a layer of Side. Okay.
03:44 ABHA MARATHE: and then on the top of that, You have. All your silicone. Right. So This is one. This is an So, you know that this substrate is also called as bulk. One, and this is 8. I am not drawing the n-type and the end Willentvi will air and open and feed, open. I'm not trying though. No drain and the source here. Okay. So gate Which is made up of. Policy.
04:31 ABHA MARATHE: now, if you see the name, MOSFET, The initial days. It was the case. It was the metal. And now they have replaced it with some policy liquid material. this is, Excite led. And this is semiconductor. Because we just piece of statement speed type. I am talking about a piece of straight, it is P type semiconductor. This is nothing, but your two terminal structure, okay? So substrate is of p-type and it is always lightly doped. Light. Don't. Okay, which, which impurity I have used to create a piece of state. Yeah, which type of impurity I have used to create the piece of straight. You should know which impurity we use to create a P type.
05:44 ABHA MARATHE: Is it ever first lecture?
05:46 AISHWARYA KHOPE: Traveling.
05:47 ABHA MARATHE: Yeah. So, you are using the trial and Accepted Impurity. Okay, so this is life. That means you have added the trivalent impurity to create the free type. This is pretty type. P type semiconductor. So I have used the drive and impurity but how I have doped it I have doubted lightly Now, if you remember, I told you to understand the meaning of this doping which is very important is in our subject, okay? Lightly talked medium, doped and
06:24 ABHA MARATHE: heavily, don't Right. So what does it mean when I say like you don't likely dope means in one silicon in one unit area. I'm heading very few Atoms of impurity. Medium means, I am adding the medium impurity. Heavily means I'm adding heavy impurity. Okay, so what does it mean? Let us say in one centimeter cube there are around 5 into 10 to power, 22, atoms of silicon.
07:09 ABHA MARATHE: Right? And when I say lightly door, what I will do nearly 10 to power 12 to 10 to power 14. Per centimeter cube. Impurity, I will add. Okay, similarly, when I go for a medium doping, some 10 to power, 14, to 10 to power 18. For centimeter cube. Into power 18. To some train to power 20 or 22 percentage. See you might have solved examples in your last semester as well where you might have denoted this concentration as any ND acceptor.
07:58 ABHA MARATHE: To donor, right? If you would have solved example, I'm not aware of that, but let it be, if not, also, this is what, actually, it means, that means what I have done in one centimeter cube in when I am having in one centimeter, cube nearly this much, as I am having, and I have added 10 to power 12, to 10 to power 14. To power 12 to 24 hour, 14 impurities.
08:23 ABHA MARATHE: I mean, this particular Silicon. So it is called as likely don't but instead of adding this much, if I add 10 to 14 to 18, It becomes medium low. So how many impurities you are? Adding units of the impurity. You have added to create that subset particular subscribe. Material is called either lightly talked, or medium, Doctor, Heavy leader. So your piece of straight. I see last class, I told you, you should sit when whenever we have online session, don't sit simply attending the session on, you know, sitting on a sofa live on a bed. These session this again, I'm not going to repeat.
09:07 ABHA MARATHE: Okay, and I will not answer the query. If you're asking me the same, again, whatever is taken in the class. Make a better practice to write, write down the notes. What I am writing here. And not necessary that this will be in your notes. Okay, so such a deep thing, I am not going to give in notes. Rather the PPT would have seen Whatever PPT, I will share that will not have this many, you know, small things.
09:32 ABHA MARATHE: So it is your responsibility to note down this small point. Also, this will be helpful for you in your cvv exam. Okay, your oral exam. so, let us Come back here. So I was discussing that your P. Type substrate is likely don't. Please. Lightly dope. Okay, because I want the channel to be formed here very easily, it should formed. Then I want the threshold voltage to be low. If you keep the high doping, the social voltage will be more and there are more few more reasons.
10:13 ABHA MARATHE: Also, you can get a better control of kit and on if you keep this lightly, don't so always and always this piece of state is like we do first thing. Then. After that, what are you going to do? You're going to Grow. A silicon dioxide layer on this. Suppose this silicon, this semiconductor. This is silicon. To the air, which will react with the oxygen. And this will be your SiO2 Which is an oxide, okay? And after that, you go for creating this great reason, which is again a policy. We call policy one is again a type of a it's a structure of the semiconductor, okay? Whenever a semiconductor adding the dope and so you have crystalline, you have a more force So it is one of the structure so your plate is always a policylicon.
11:17 ABHA MARATHE: like, Okay, so it is silicon. Only it is again a What to say A conducting material on the On the instead of metal. Now, we are using that particular material. But this is what actually is here to tell me the structure. This oxide acts as a dielectric insulator. Which is the main concept. Okay. It is the main concept. Now, let us understand the behavior electric behavior. Let us go for the electrical behavior of this.
12:02 ABHA MARATHE: How this? Mosque app, behaves. And keeping only two terminal right now. I'm having only the substrate. And the gate. Okay, so let me let me write it as body. Body. Let us say this is ground. Just assume and I am spending you, the working. Let us say, it is grounded. and now, What happens? When I give, That this this is the gate voltage. Let us say what happened when I give a negative voltage. This is free time.
12:59 ABHA MARATHE: Means it will have majority of positive charges, minority of them, negative charge. Okay, something like that. So whenever you get terminal is less than zero when it is negative. Now, this is forming a capacitance. Because this is dielectric, oxide is a dielectric. Right. And this is what actually your capacitance. This capacitance. I'm calling us see G b. Epistles between gate. Just a minute, it is. Spain is visible because some net connection was there. For this. Yeah. So this is gate and this is body. The capacitance present between the gate and the body is called denoted as cgb.
14:04 ABHA MARATHE: Okay, so this is Poly silicon which is a conducting material. This is semiconductor which is again a correct conducting material and this is the insulator in between yes it is. Forming a capacitor like structure. And what is the property of the capacitor? property of capacity is the if one terminal of the capacitor is influenced under a Under a electric field. The effect can be seen on the second plate. Also.
14:36 ABHA MARATHE: though, there is a insulator present in between And hence, by the same property, what will happen? If you and if you are applying a negative voltage, all the positive careers, we get accumulated near the Vedic, the gate. Right. All will get accumulated here, all positive. And negative charge will go here. So, you will find a Accumulation of the positive charges beneath the gate. This is called as accumulation region.
15:25 ABHA MARATHE: So what I have done, I have grounded this body and I am applying negative voltage. So I'm getting the all the charge charges positive charges here. So because of that, I'm getting this as a accumulation region. Right now, let us say Let us go. This is the first case you just go down there somewhere. Or take the screenshot. So what I am repeating again? Whenever the gate voltage is less than the zero value. That is it is negative voltage. The positive charges gets attracted and the positive charge, get accumulated beneath the gate near below the exact below the gate. This region is called as accumulation vision. First, take first condition. Second.
16:14 ABHA MARATHE: now, assume that I am going for, Positive it. Positive. Greater than 0. Now, let us say that my VG is greater than 0, but it is very small. It's very small value, but it is positive. Okay, because of positive VG. What will happen? The majority carriers. Which are? Holes will get. Repent away. Will get repel. There will not be any carriers because of which the current should flow in P type. And hence you will get a particular region here where there are no variable carriers. Known and mobile. Carriers. That means this region is depleted of mobile carriers. Hence, this region is called as depletion region. This region is called as depletion region.
17:46 ABHA MARATHE: Right. Because the gate voltage, which I have applied here is actually Positive and it is small. And it is a small. Because of that what has happened that positive carriers are repent. But the voltage is not enough to attract the minority carriers. Now, Third Estate what I will do, I will increase this gate voltage. I will make it large. How much large? Large. Such that. The negative carriers which are present here. Will get attracted.
18:33 ABHA MARATHE: I will draw the negative careers in black color, otherwise that oxide and will be Seen as seen. So, this negative carriers minority carriers, they are attracted now. Now, you are getting on the minority carriers negative carriers, they are presented. Right. That means what has happened. If you see You have applied. Positive gate voltage. Because of that. Negative layer is formed. Right? So you are getting a negative layer of charges here.
19:23 ABHA MARATHE: And how much voltage you have, applied a big voltage, which the larger value, which is greater than some threshold, will see, what is this, which is greater than some threshold value. Which will attract this value, this carriers. This is called as inversion. There. Right. This is called as inversion layer or inversion region. so we are here only on the to get Two structure. Two terminal structure. Is it clear? Shall I? Move ahead? To terminal structure is clear. Now, let us move over here. Let us go for understanding the other. Terminal, which we have in our conventional.
20:32 ABHA MARATHE: so, This is only the two terminal now. What actually we have we don't have this. We have understood only but If you remember, You have a? Piece of street. Be substrate. Then you have a gate oxide. On that, you have the silicon dioxide and then you have a Gate. and you have, Two regions. now, this two regions are And regions. this two regions are heavily, doped Okay, we have seen light, always remember this convention whenever you have.
21:44 ABHA MARATHE: Lightly doped, it is denoted as minus, Okay? That means lightly don't and type It is and minus. Medium dope. Medium dough. And tie. It is in denoted, as simple and Heavily doped. A really. O. and plus, And same is true for paid type. If i change n type 2 p type, it will be n. Plus n, my p minus p and p plus Right? So whenever you are saying n plus, you are seeing n plus you should understand that. Oh, this is a semiconductor which is heavily dog and type semiconductor, which is a really low and minus. It is n type semiconductor which is likely dope. And so So this is what actually is your mosfetime. Right now, how this MOSFET is formed. See, for two dimension. It looks like this.
23:00 ABHA MARATHE: But when you go for three dimension, say within This is what actually is your Looks of your three, your two dimension. That means you can see from both the end. Okay. Generally, we are drawing this this much. Okay, but actually it goes like this. so, policylicon or metal, which is a gate This is the gate oxide, orange calories, SIO to layer. you have this as a piece of straight and you have this as your source and dream, Okay. So this is MOSFET this is and this is a p type, no p-type. So this is n substrate. It is Emos. Right. So this is what actually how it looks. And how it is constructed that we will go very fast. You just see whether I'm having.
24:17 ABHA MARATHE: it's It is constructed in this. First of all, a silicon substitute is taken. Now it is reverse okay. If you are going for NMOS, you start with piece of straight and you go for PMOs. You start with n success substrate, Okay, so now I'm going for Nmos or otherwise you can remember in this way whenever you go for NMOS your channel is and and Channel. So whenever it is N channel, it is a piece of stuff. Whatever way you feel.
24:53 ABHA MARATHE: So first of all, the silicone substitute is taken. Now, what I want I want to grow oxide layer on that. okay, so I want to grow It is something like this. yeah, say To grow oxide layer, and then the gate, and then the source. But it is not possible for you to grow the oxide layer only in this particular area because we imagine how small it is. We have discussed in the first session how small they are. Okay, so small device, nanometer.
25:34 ABHA MARATHE: So precise, oxygen growth. So much precise policy silicon growth. The policy for silicon material is not possible. So what they have opted for what they do, they do for the entire My case of straight, they grow the oxide layer for the entire substrate. And then they remove They're not required part. And they keep the required part. This is what the procedure every time they do. Okay. So here also to grow the SiO to how they are going, the SiO to first of all, they have grown this, I o2 on the entire subset. Now, they want to remove this part.
26:19 ABHA MARATHE: What they do. They use one photo of this material photo. Adjust material is a material which will work or she will be, which is so fun. Whenever a UV light is applied on that. Okay. So what they do, they again? Again, cover the entire surface with SiO with the photo resist material. After that, it create a mask. Why? Because they want the UV light to touch the photo resist. So this is Blocked. So, this mask is nothing, but this is transparent or opaque transparent. Transparent means what the mask, is something like this as I'm asking, sorry. So UV, light will go here.
27:18 ABHA MARATHE: So wherever it is open, you'll be light comes. This is the open part, yellow is the open part. So UV light will get will fall on this. But because of this top, black color UV light will not pass on this photo resist. Right. You will write again. We'll pass on this. We'll fall on this. And because of the UV light exposure, this photo resist gives softened and it is easy to wipe it off. So it is wiped off. And reverse will also happen.
27:56 ABHA MARATHE: Is it clear? Let me just.
27:58 VED KULKARNI: Handed out.
28:01 ABHA MARATHE: Yes. Awesome.
28:04 VED KULKARNI: Ma'am, as you said, previously that, we cannot precisely cover some regions then how masking can cover the precise region.
28:18 ABHA MARATHE: When you are going for masking, You are just have the optical mask which is a simple material again. You don't want the the ions or you don't want the UV light to go here and there. Right, so it is not exactly precisely grown also, I will show you the Final transistor. Can you see this final transistor? This is the final transistor. There you have some overlap. And you see this overlap. Actually speaking you should have the transistors something like this. Atharva. This is actually the ideal transistor. Where you should not have the the overlap, but you cannot avoid this overlap. It will come.
29:16 ABHA MARATHE: It was when you go for door, paint the optical mask which we were discussing, it is used every time that means when you are growing, the substrate, Okay? So let us say you have created a gate Now, this gate itself will act as a mask. And when you go for iron, implantation, that means you are going for doping just up and doping. You are adding more and more impurity atoms.
29:49 ABHA MARATHE: So that the end type is created here. So the beauty is you have a piece of straight and in that you are creating and well, In. So I want to make this much part. Because the rest of should be the gate, but this will never happen because of not preciseness, only this will go here and there. Is it here? Huh, but we are.
30:17 VED KULKARNI: All. Also the well, will be not precise, right? Because
30:22 ABHA MARATHE: Oh yes. Yes. But it is symmetrical. See what happens is. You don't have this. In detail is difficult for me to explain. He just, You, you cannot have the, you know, for all let us say. I'm going for 180 nanometer technology. Okay, so when I go for 180 nanometer technology, it is very, very difficult because I'm having the transistor. This is the length of the channel. Whenever I say nanometer technology, it is the length of the channel.
31:14 ABHA MARATHE: So, whenever I am having, let us say how I'm growing this silicon dioxide on this, by exposing it to the to the oxygen. It is very difficult for me to expose it, only this part to the oxygen. Because of the constraint because when you go for fabrication depending on which method is easy because for both you need a precise thing but which method is taking less time and which method is less costly that you are prefering.
31:53 ABHA MARATHE: Okay, so going for because every time this is the unique method. Every time I will have photo resist, if you see, I will show you all the patterns are grown like that. For example, Let us say, I want to grow for this oxide is done. Let us say, every time I want to go for the photo resist material. That means first of all, I have grown the silicon dioxide after that. I am going for the gate formation, which is again a policycorn again. I want only that much part. Okay, so this is every time it will be difficult because to grow the silicon taxi for a precise lane. You have to go for some different, you know, different To say different procedure.
32:41 ABHA MARATHE: Okay, so for this, you have to go for different procedures, then you go for ion, implantation. You have to go for different employers, different procedure. Instead of that what they have done, they have standardized this method of Photoresistant optical mask. So every time whenever you want a particular pattern to be generated, you should go for on for the photo resistant. Optical part. Optical mask. That's it. So you cover it and you remove the remaining thing.
33:10 ABHA MARATHE: This is what actually is repeated every time. So, instead of one process of growth of oxide when different procedure growth of ion, implantation, one different growth of your you know what to say. Policylican, One different procedure. Instead of that, they say that you apply to all and just you go for using optical mask and photos. Are getting it. Hard. So just to avoid the complexity and it is not only one time it is going for, it is the repetitive procedure. Okay, every time it will happen whenever you are growing it. So this is how you are growing one by one step by step.
33:58 ABHA MARATHE: Right, I want you to understand see this is not in your syllabus, but I want you to understand one very important point which will because I am I want you to be
34:10 ABHA MARATHE: prepared with your some interview point of view as well. So Photo Resist Material. Okay. So, what actually is photo resist and what is the meaning of refer? That these two things I want you to understand what is photoresist. It is used only to grow the different patterns on the, on the On your transistor. Right? So that it will it will be used as a, you know, as a optical mask can be
34:41 ABHA MARATHE: used on that. So, that a particular specific pattern can be generated. Right. So this is what actually is the role of your UV light to create the particular pattern. Okay. Now this was our main thing which I was discussing that this is the channel length. The channel with and this is the channel, then we'll come to that. We just Shall I proceed or any other further down? Okay, so this is what I was discussing.
35:19 ABHA MARATHE: Okay. How these are grown that I have shown you that Now. This is what you have, okay? And what we have seen till now that you have a negative carriers over here, Because I have grounded this. And I have applied v, g. greater than Some voltage VT. And I am taking this two point as source. And one point is both our interchangeable. You can interchange the source and green and this is big.
36:11 ABHA MARATHE: this is what is your four terminal MOSFET and I'm talking about nmosphate Gate is used only to control. Right? Let us say this is ground. This is ground. So though, I am having negative charge here. so, this is actually Called as inversion layer. Or it is called as channel. What is the unique? Aspect of MOSFET. That. Providing. Positive voltage. You are creating. Inverted layer. Providing the positive voltage, negative latest is a form, but remember there will not be any current. No, current will flow.
37:42 ABHA MARATHE: Why? Because current flows only then there is a potential difference. This channel is formed. But this terminal is also zero. This terminal is also 0, both are at same potential. Current will find Right. No, current will flow. But then, I apply. A positive voltage here. VD. And what should happen? Yes. What should happen when a voltage? I have applied here. Current Windflower will not flow. It will flow.
38:42 ABHA MARATHE: Current wind flow, okay? but, The channel. Now, you understand this very important part?
38:57 ABHA MARATHE: This is my gate. BG. Sources grounded. Okay. When I say vg, what does it mean? Do you know What is the meaning of this VG when I say Vg? Bgm is what? Vijay means the voltage between this terminal, K terminal and ground. Voltage is always measured with respect to ground. So this is with VG. is nothing but At gate or between. 8. And ground. And my sources grounded, right? That means VG is actually between gate and source or I can simply write it as Vgs.
40:05 ABHA MARATHE: V, Gs is the voltage between gate and source. Similarly, now, I am applying Positive. V d or we ds. Okay. So what is Vgs Vgs is greater than VT. It was the first condition. Second condition is vds. I am applying Okay. Now, when my vds is positive, By Vedas value is positive and having the Channel. parent over near the Negative carriers are here, but The channel will not be. It will be something like this. Saran Origin. Right. Now you go on. Increasing this videos value.
40:58 ABHA MARATHE: Bgs. You keep saying, but let us say, you have applied some videos and four and five. You want applying this vedious value What will happen to the channel? It will become like this. It will go on yes or no. Right. It will be like this, can you, can anybody tell me why this will happen? And even tell me. Yes, the car will then videos value is large.
41:42 ABHA MARATHE: Why my channel is something like the channel means, what? This region where I'm having the Charges. Is on my carriers. As a tapered. Now, understand this. Because this is only.
42:09 VED KULKARNI: Are more gate voltage to allow this because we have to increase the channel length.
42:16 ABHA MARATHE: There is no rule of Vgs. It is the Vedi which is defining it. Okay. Channel Length Modulation. If you have studied, you have you might have studied it in the Saturation region. And in saturation region, it is the Vedience which is changing. Not the Vgs. Okay, so now let me tell you why it happens. when you are applying vds value, it is between when I say Vedas, It is vt minus. Yes.
42:53 ABHA MARATHE: Right. Similarly, at my let me talk about this side. Let us focus on this side of the Electric field. The g and d this electric field. Okay. So this side electric field so it is v, g minus v d. Or i can simply write v, gs minus v ds because source is ground. So on this side I'm having the electric field as V. Gs minus V Ds or Vg, minus v d. On this side. That means it is between gate and source. B g s. It is VG minus yes. What is the value of v s? It is 0. So v gs is vg.
43:53 ABHA MARATHE: Okay, so if you compare the two things, you compare the right this electric field is because of this. This side is because of Vgs. now, if you compare this two equations, You will find that Vgs or VG is same. Okay, this one and compare this awesome. Not if you see you have the debt electric field less on the right side. Because here, v, g minus v d and here we go.
44:31 ABHA MARATHE: So if you compare Equation, 1 and Equation 2 vgd on the right side, electric field is less. Whereas left side it is more than net net. I'm talking about since it is more. This side. You have more carriers. And since the electric field is less, here it is. It is, you know, it is attracting this carriers. And hence, this is the train and You go on increasing this video. This video you go on increasing video or video. Same because source is grounded.
45:05 ABHA MARATHE: You go on increasing to increase increase. It will just go on and one stage will come when You will get the Channel, something like this. You are left with this much of channel. Our channel. This is what is your channel length, modulation, which you have studied. Which is. Because of the increase in vedi value. now if you increase more, also there will not be any effect on that which is called as vds set Saturation. Which is called as we ds, or we saturation vision. Right. So you are going, you're increasing the value of Vedi or Vds. Right.
46:05 ABHA MARATHE: Okay. Now let us again come back to this and try to understand it with the region point of view, which you might have already seen. Now, I'm just focusing on the channel for the channel. We for this Vijay should be greater than Vtm and you call it as Vgs. Should be greater than we did. This condition is always there. Now, the next is this is what is your channel? The channel will be like a rod, a conductor, surprise survatina. Now you go on, increasing the vedi value. Or vds value network.
46:53 ABHA MARATHE: again, you increase again, you increase It will be something like this. It will be more tapered. Again, you go for that in your increase. Will be more tapered to them, and again, you increase. It will be like this. And this is your Burlap and I think. So let me say it sometimes. I said So what is your overall? Okay, this is what actually is your channel. Now. There it is. Pinch off. Channel is pinch off.
47:55 ABHA MARATHE: Okay, so initially if you see when you are, your vgs value was the first condition when your Vgs value was greater than VT. And You have applied vds value. But that vedious value was. greater was a less than it was less than EGS minus vt. At that time, it is as good as a conductor. Here wrought. A life structure. So what will be the relationship between the current and voltage? The current and voltage will be. Omic relationship. Okay, the relationship will be the omega relationship where your you go on. Increasing the value. It will increase, right? So this is like a conductor.
48:53 ABHA MARATHE: Hence you will have a small small broad light structure and because of that, what will happen that it will behave as a, it will show. The only reason which is also called as near region, Which is also called as the linear region, right? just, So this is your ID. And this is your PD or Vds. So you go on increasing increasing. But once one step comes when you are really become saturated, that means you increase the vedi value, but there will not be any effect on the current, okay, so at this point, Comes. You know, this is your linear region. This is your. Saturation region. To go increase your value of DD, but your current will not increase.
50:20 ABHA MARATHE: and actually, if I tell you more minutely, There is a reduced slope asana. It is not like that. It is, reduced slope. So your slope is reduced here. Actually speaking and that reduce slope is because the voltage at the grain at
50:42 ABHA MARATHE: which the channel is pinch off, which is called as vedious value. So it is only because you are channel is getting, you know Tapper. How do you just getting shorter? Right? And that is why you are getting this look. So this is what actually is the Iv Characteristics. Of. Animals, we are discussing and You have a linear region, you have a saturation region. Right, when? And similarly, when you go for Saturation region.
51:20 ABHA MARATHE: A vgs value will be will be greater than of course threshold value and Radius is greater than Vgs minus vt. Okay. Because by this Vgs minus v, t has come because at the drain side the channel is pinched off. Okay? That is absent. This is because the electric field at the drain site is less than the threshold voltage. It's a concept. I What is the concept of this? Why you are getting this as? the reason is, Saturation Region with a cry. What you're getting in the saturation region. Your channel is pinch of Okay, this is your entire channel and it is pinch of here itself.
52:09 ABHA MARATHE: so when it is pinched off, That is the channel is not present here. This is because the net electric field at the drain side is less than vt. So Nate electric field is less than Vt. What was the net electric field. This was the net electric field. On the drain side. in eight, electric field companies and you know, getting how much how much less It is less than the threshold voltage.
52:35 ABHA MARATHE: That means v g is minus v. Ds is less than threshold voltage. That means if I say vds is greater than Vgs plus vt. And that is why you are getting it. Okay. So in conclusion Then you apply the drain voltage here. Vedi the net electric field on the drain side which is vg, minus V d will go on reducing. It will reduce to certain extent let that extensive less than vt. So, vt picture commission here since it is less than vt. Also, the channel, the channel is pinched off here. No, no carrier are present here.
53:23 ABHA MARATHE: So, it is so less. It is less than threshold voltage. It is not able to get the carrier over there because of the electric field effect. And hence your ved. It this is a condition. Then your VG minus V is less than vt in the saturation vision. So instead of VG minus video, I can call Vgs minus vds less than VT or Vds or. Oh yes. -8. Credit. So Vds. Is greater than v. Gs minus v 2.
54:04 ABHA MARATHE: These are the conditions of your saturation region, linear region, or triode region. So, you transistor operates in three regions. First region is. So this was only the, You might have studied this region in the last semester, but I thought that I should again tell you. your transistor operate in three region first is First is the cutoff region. Second is the linear or the triode or the ohmic region. Vgs is better than VT. V DS is less than Vgs minus vt.
54:51 ABHA MARATHE: whereas, when you go for your this region, saturation, region, For saturation, it is greater. This is what actually are the regions and this is what actually is the Current. Current characteristic the vds ID characteristic. For different value of. Different value of Vgs you change. Now, you have kept some Vgs value. Let us say this is one word. Yeah, I kept. It is too good. But two words, you're getting one curve.
55:44 ABHA MARATHE: Now you change the vgs value and again, go for changing your videos and ID, you will get the second curve. The third, the fourth current, so, Right, this is what actually your transistor characteristics. And Moss and MOSFET, okay. Take the stop here. The number one. Two.
56:30 ANIKET DAKORE: better than
56:30 ABHA MARATHE: Three. Four.
56:34 ATHARVA BHAGWAT: Minimum.
56:35 ABHA MARATHE: Five.
56:39 SUDARSHAN CHAUDHARI: Doesn't.
56:40 ABHA MARATHE: Six.
56:42 SUDARSHAN CHAUDHARI: Sixth President.
56:43 ABHA MARATHE: Seven. Eight. Nine.
56:52 TANVI KOKANE: And man.
56:52 ABHA MARATHE: 10. Vi 11. 12, Once you have marked your attendance. Yeah, you can leave 12.
57:04 MANAS TAMBEKAR: Present.
57:04 ABHA MARATHE: 13.
57:05 APURVA BHAMARE: Is in.
57:06 ABHA MARATHE: 14.
  